<!--[metadata]>
+++
title = "OverlayFS storage in practice"
description = "Learn how to optimize your use of OverlayFS driver."
keywords = ["container, storage, driver, OverlayFS "]
[menu.main]
parent = "engine_driver"
+++
<![end-metadata]-->

# Docker and OverlayFS in practice

OverlayFS is a modern *union filesystem* that is similar to AUFS. In comparison
 to AUFS, OverlayFS:

* has a simpler design
* has been in the mainline Linux kernel since version 3.18
* is potentially faster

As a result, OverlayFS is rapidly gaining popularity in the Docker community 
and is seen by many as a natural successor to AUFS. As promising as OverlayFS 
is, it is still relatively young. Therefore caution should be taken before 
using it in production Docker environments.

Docker's `overlay` storage driver leverages several OverlayFS features to build
 and manage the on-disk structures of images and containers.

>**Note**: Since it was merged into the mainline kernel, the OverlayFS *kernel 
>module* was renamed from "overlayfs" to "overlay". As a result you may see the
> two terms used interchangeably in some documentation. However, this document 
> uses  "OverlayFS" to refer to the overall filesystem, and `overlay` to refer 
> to Docker's storage-driver.

## Image layering and sharing with OverlayFS

OverlayFS takes two directories on a single Linux host, layers one on top of 
the other, and provides a single unified view. These directories are often 
referred to as *layers* and the technology used to layer them is known as a 
*union mount*. The OverlayFS terminology is "lowerdir" for the bottom layer and
 "upperdir" for the top layer. The unified view is exposed through its own 
directory called "merged".

The diagram below shows how a Docker image and a Docker container are layered. 
The image layer is the "lowerdir" and the container layer is the "upperdir". 
The unified view is exposed through a directory called "merged" which is 
effectively the containers mount point. The diagram shows how Docker constructs
 map to OverlayFS constructs.

![](images/overlay_constructs.jpg)

Notice how the image layer and container layer can contain the same files. When
 this happens, the files in the container layer ("upperdir") are dominant and 
obscure the existence of the same files in the image layer ("lowerdir"). The 
container mount ("merged") presents the unified view.

OverlayFS only works with two layers. This means that multi-layered images 
cannot be implemented as multiple OverlayFS layers. Instead, each image layer 
is implemented as its own directory under `/var/lib/docker/overlay`. 
Hard links are then used as a space-efficient way to reference data shared with
 lower layers. As of Docker 1.10, image layer IDs no longer correspond to 
directory names in `/var/lib/docker/`

To create a container, the `overlay` driver combines the directory representing
 the image's top layer plus a new directory for the container. The image's top 
layer is the "lowerdir" in the overlay and read-only. The new directory for the
 container is the "upperdir" and is writable.

## Example: Image and container on-disk constructs

The following `docker pull` command shows a Docker host with downloading a 
Docker image comprising four layers.

    $ sudo docker pull ubuntu
    Using default tag: latest
    latest: Pulling from library/ubuntu
    8387d9ff0016: Pull complete
    3b52deaaf0ed: Pull complete
    4bd501fad6de: Pull complete
    a3ed95caeb02: Pull complete
    Digest: sha256:457b05828bdb5dcc044d93d042863fba3f2158ae249a6db5ae3934307c757c54
    Status: Downloaded newer image for ubuntu:latest

Each image layer has it's own directory under `/var/lib/docker/overlay/`. This 
is where the the contents of each image layer are stored. 

The output of the command below shows the four directories that store the 
contents of each image layer just pulled. However, as can be seen, the image 
layer IDs do not match the directory names in `/var/lib/docker/overlay`. This 
is normal behavior in Docker 1.10 and later.

    $ ls -l /var/lib/docker/overlay/
    total 24
    drwx------ 3 root root 4096 Oct 28 11:02 1d073211c498fd5022699b46a936b4e4bdacb04f637ad64d3475f558783f5c3e
    drwx------ 3 root root 4096 Oct 28 11:02 5a4526e952f0aa24f3fcc1b6971f7744eb5465d572a48d47c492cb6bbf9cbcda
    drwx------ 5 root root 4096 Oct 28 11:06 99fcaefe76ef1aa4077b90a413af57fd17d19dce4e50d7964a273aae67055235
    drwx------ 3 root root 4096 Oct 28 11:01 c63fb41c2213f511f12f294dd729b9903a64d88f098c20d2350905ac1fdbcbba

The image layer directories contain the files unique to that layer as well as 
hard links to the data that is shared with lower layers. This allows for 
efficient use of disk space.

Containers also exist on-disk in the Docker host's filesystem under 
`/var/lib/docker/overlay/`. If you inspect the directory relating to a running 
container using the `ls -l` command, you find the following file and 
directories.

    $ ls -l /var/lib/docker/overlay/<directory-of-running-container>
    total 16
    -rw-r--r-- 1 root root   64 Oct 28 11:06 lower-id
    drwxr-xr-x 1 root root 4096 Oct 28 11:06 merged
    drwxr-xr-x 4 root root 4096 Oct 28 11:06 upper
    drwx------ 3 root root 4096 Oct 28 11:06 work

These four filesystem objects are all artifacts of OverlayFS. The "lower-id" 
file contains the ID of the top layer of the image the container is based on. 
This is used by OverlayFS as the "lowerdir".

    $ cat /var/lib/docker/overlay/73de7176c223a6c82fd46c48c5f152f2c8a7e49ecb795a7197c3bb795c4d879e/lower-id
    1d073211c498fd5022699b46a936b4e4bdacb04f637ad64d3475f558783f5c3e

The "upper" directory is the containers read-write layer. Any changes made to 
the container are written to this directory.

The "merged" directory is effectively the containers mount point. This is where
 the unified view of the image ("lowerdir") and container ("upperdir") is 
exposed. Any changes written to the container are immediately reflected in this
 directory.

The "work" directory is required for OverlayFS to function. It is used for 
things such as *copy_up* operations.

You can verify all of these constructs from the output of the `mount` command. 
(Ellipses and line breaks are used in the output below to enhance readability.)

    $ mount | grep overlay
    overlay on /var/lib/docker/overlay/73de7176c223.../merged
    type overlay (rw,relatime,lowerdir=/var/lib/docker/overlay/1d073211c498.../root,
    upperdir=/var/lib/docker/overlay/73de7176c223.../upper,
    workdir=/var/lib/docker/overlay/73de7176c223.../work)

The output reflects that the overlay is mounted as read-write ("rw").

## Container reads and writes with overlay

Consider three scenarios where a container opens a file for read access with 
overlay.

- **The file does not exist in the container layer**. If a container opens a 
file for read access and the file does not already exist in the container 
("upperdir") it is read from the image ("lowerdir"). This should incur very 
little performance overhead.

- **The file only exists in the container layer**. If a container opens a file 
for read access and the file exists in the container ("upperdir") and not in 
the image ("lowerdir"), it is read directly from the container.

- **The file exists in the container layer and the image layer**. If a 
container opens a file for read access and the file exists in the image layer 
and the container layer, the file's version in the container layer is read. 
This is because files in the container layer ("upperdir") obscure files with 
the same name in the image layer ("lowerdir").

Consider some scenarios where files in a container are modified.

- **Writing to a file for the first time**. The first time a container writes 
to an existing file, that file does not exist in the container ("upperdir"). 
The `overlay` driver performs a *copy_up* operation to copy the file from the 
image ("lowerdir") to the container ("upperdir"). The container then writes the
 changes to the new copy of the file in the container layer.

    However, OverlayFS works at the file level not the block level. This means 
that all OverlayFS copy-up operations copy entire files, even if the file is 
very large and only a small part of it is being modified. This can have a 
noticeable impact on container write performance. However, two things are 
worth noting:

    * The copy_up operation only occurs the first time any given file is 
written to. Subsequent writes to the same file will operate against the copy of
 the file already copied up to the container.

    * OverlayFS only works with two layers. This means that performance should 
be better than AUFS which can suffer noticeable latencies when searching for 
files in images with many layers.

- **Deleting files and directories**. When files are deleted within a container
 a *whiteout* file is created in the containers "upperdir". The version of the 
file in the image layer ("lowerdir") is not deleted. However, the whiteout file
 in the container obscures it.

    Deleting a directory in a container results in *opaque directory* being 
created in the "upperdir". This has the same effect as a whiteout file and 
effectively masks the existence of the directory in the image's "lowerdir".

## Configure Docker with the overlay storage driver

To configure Docker to use the overlay storage driver your Docker host must be 
running version 3.18 of the Linux kernel (preferably newer) with the overlay 
kernel module loaded. OverlayFS can operate on top of most supported Linux 
filesystems. However, ext4 is currently recommended for use in production 
environments.

The following procedure shows you how to configure your Docker host to use 
OverlayFS. The procedure assumes that the Docker daemon is in a stopped state.

> **Caution:** If you have already run the Docker daemon on your Docker host 
> and have images you want to keep, `push` them Docker Hub or your private 
> Docker Trusted Registry before attempting this procedure.

1. If it is running, stop the Docker `daemon`.

2. Verify your kernel version and that the overlay kernel module is loaded.

        $ uname -r
        3.19.0-21-generic

        $ lsmod | grep overlay
        overlay

3. Start the Docker daemon with the `overlay` storage driver.

        $ docker daemon --storage-driver=overlay &
        [1] 29403
        root@ip-10-0-0-174:/home/ubuntu# INFO[0000] Listening for HTTP on unix (/var/run/docker.sock)
        INFO[0000] Option DefaultDriver: bridge
        INFO[0000] Option DefaultNetwork: bridge
        <output truncated>

    Alternatively, you can force the Docker daemon to automatically start with
    the `overlay` driver by editing the Docker config file and adding the
    `--storage-driver=overlay` flag to the `DOCKER_OPTS` line. Once this option
    is set you can start the daemon using normal startup scripts without having
    to manually pass in the `--storage-driver` flag.

4. Verify that the daemon is using the `overlay` storage driver

        $ docker info
        Containers: 0
        Images: 0
        Storage Driver: overlay
         Backing Filesystem: extfs
        <output truncated>

    Notice that the *Backing filesystem* in the output above is showing as 
`extfs`. Multiple backing filesystems are supported but `extfs` (ext4) is 
recommended for production use cases.

Your Docker host is now using the `overlay` storage driver. If you run the 
`mount` command, you'll find Docker has automatically created the `overlay` 
mount with the required "lowerdir", "upperdir", "merged" and "workdir" 
constructs.

## OverlayFS and Docker Performance

As a general rule, the `overlay` driver should be fast. Almost certainly faster
 than `aufs` and `devicemapper`. In certain circumstances it may also be faster
 than `btrfs`. That said, there are a few things to be aware of relative to the
 performance of Docker using the `overlay` storage driver.

- **Page Caching**. OverlayFS supports page cache sharing. This means multiple 
containers accessing the same file can share a single page cache entry (or 
entries). This makes the `overlay` driver efficient with memory and a good 
option for PaaS and other high density use cases.

- **copy_up**. As with AUFS, OverlayFS has to perform copy-up operations any 
time a container writes to a file for the first time. This can insert latency 
into the write operation &mdash; especially if the file being copied up is 
large. However, once the file has been copied up, all subsequent writes to that
 file occur without the need for further copy-up operations.

    The OverlayFS copy_up operation should be faster than the same operation 
with AUFS. This is because AUFS supports more layers than OverlayFS and it is 
possible to incur far larger latencies if searching through many AUFS layers.

- **RPMs and Yum**. OverlayFS only implements a subset of the POSIX standards. 
This can result in certain OverlayFS operations breaking POSIX standards. One 
such operation is the *copy-up* operation. Therefore, using `yum` inside of a 
container on a Docker host using the `overlay` storage driver is unlikely to 
work without implementing workarounds.

- **Inode limits**. Use of the `overlay` storage driver can cause excessive 
inode consumption. This is especially so as the number of images and containers
 on the Docker host grows. A Docker host with a large number of images and lots
 of started and stopped containers can quickly run out of inodes.

Unfortunately you can only specify the number of inodes in a filesystem at the 
time of creation. For this reason, you may wish to consider putting 
`/var/lib/docker` on a separate device with its own filesystem, or manually 
specifying the number of inodes when creating the filesystem.

The following generic performance best practices also apply to OverlayFS.

- **Solid State Devices (SSD)**. For best performance it is always a good idea 
to use fast storage media such as solid state devices (SSD).

- **Use Data Volumes**. Data volumes provide the best and most predictable 
performance. This is because they bypass the storage driver and do not incur 
any of the potential overheads introduced by thin provisioning and 
copy-on-write. For this reason, you should place heavy write workloads on data 
volumes.
